PAP 1 Ma 293 A variety of mob-madness to which we all seem to be more or less subject is manifested in taking up vague opinions about which our associates and companions seem strenuous. I am apt, in some moments, to be wary of admitting doctrines of which no definition can be given. An eminent and admirable physiologist concludes a volume of great interest with this sentence: "The idea that mutation is working in a definite direction is a mere anthropomorphism, and like all anthropomorphisms is in contradiction with the facts." If I attach a definite meaning to "anthropomorphism," I should think it stood to reason that a man could not have any idea that was not anthropomorphic, and that it was simply 
PAP 2 to repeat, the error of Kant to attempt to escape anthropomorphism. I should think it wise for a man to make up his mind at the outset that superhuman conceptions were. At the same time, I am confident a man can pretty well understand the thoughts of his horse, his jocose parrot, and his canary-bird, so full of espieglerie; and though his representation of these thoughts must, I suppose, be considerably falsified by anthropomorphism, yet that there is a good deal more truth than falsity in them, and more than if he were to attempt the impossible task of eliminating the anthropomorphism, I am for the present sufficiently convinced, I am led to these remarks from reflecting that a good many persons who tell themselves that they hold anthropomorphism in reprobation 
PAP 3 C1406 will nevertheless opine (though not in these terms), that I am not anthropomorphic enough in my account of logic as a science of signs and in describing signs without making any explicit reference to the human mind. A line of bricks stands on end upon a floor, each facing the next one of the line. A and one is ||||tiller|||| so as to fall over upon the next, and so they all successively fall. The mechanical statement of the phenomenon as that a portion of the sum of the original energy of motion of as that each brick had at the instant its centre of gravity was directly over its supporting edge, added to the energy of its fall is transferred into an energy of motion of the next brick, now I assert no more than this, but less, since I do not say whether it was 
PAP 4 mechanical energy, or what it was that we communicated, when, applying my definition of a Sign (namely an ||||Idee||||), I assert (as I do) that each brick is a Sign to the succeeding bricks of the line, of the original effect produced on the first brick, I freely concede that there is an anthropomorphic constituent in that statement; but there is none that is not equally present in the mechanical statement, since this asserts all that the other form asserts. Until you see this, you do not grasp the meaning that I attach to the word "Sign". I maintain that nothing but confusion can result from using in logic a more anthropomorphic conception than that. To ask how we think when we reason has no more to do with the security of the mass of particular form of argumentation 
PAP 5 that may be under criticism than the histology of the cortex of the train has to do with the same question of security. You may ask, "How does this gibe with your former statement that reasoning to self-controlled thought! There is no difference between thought and thinking, is there?" I reply, there is indeed, "Thinking" is a fabled "operation of the mind" by which an imaginary object is brought before one's gaze. I that object is a sign upon which an argument may turn, we call it a thought. All that we know of the thinking" is that we afterwards remember that our attention was actively on the stretch, and that we seemed to be creating Objects or transformations of Objects while noting their analogy to something supposed to be real. We choose to call 
PAP 6 "an operation of the mind"; and we are, of course, quite justified in doing so, provided it be well understood that its being so consists merely in our so regarding it, just as Alexander Hannibal, Caesar, and Napoleon constitute a single quaterion on plural of four, as long as we put them together in thought. The "operation of the mind" is an ensrationis. That is my insufficient excuse for speaking of it as "fables". All necessary reasoning is diagrammatic; and the assurance fournished by all other reasoning must be based upon necessary reasoning. In this sense, all reasoning depends directly or indirectly upon diagrams. Only it is necessary to distinguish reasoning, properly so called, where the acceptance conclusion in the sense in which it is drawn, 
PAP 7 is seen evidently to be justified, from cases in which a rule of inference is followed because it has been found to work, well, which I call following a rule of thumb, and accepting a conclusion without seeing why further than that the impulse to close seems irresistible. In both those cases, there might be a sound argument to defend the acceptance of the conclusion, but to accept the conclusion without any criticism or suggesting argument is not what I call reasoning. For example, a person having been accustomed to considering finite collections only might contract a habit of using the syllogism of transposed quantity, of which the following is an instance Every Hottentot kills a Hottentot Hottentot is killed by more than one Hottentot ||||?|||| Every Hottentot is killed by a Hottentot. 
PAP 8 dates forgetting why this necessarily follows for finite collections (if he ever did understand it) this person might by mere force of habit apply the same kind of reasoning to endless generations or other in finite class; or he might apply it to a finite class, but with so little understanding that, only luck would prevent his applying it to infinite collections. Such a case, is an application of a ||||?|||| a thumb and is not reasoning. Many persons are deceived by the catch about Achilles and the Tortoise; and I know one I extremely bright man who could not, for the life of him, perceive any fault in this reasoning : It either rains or its doesn't rain; ||||?|||| rains. Therefore, it doesn't rain Such people appear mistake the rule of thumb for reasoning. 
PAP 9 Descartes, in one of his letters, is quite explicit that his Jepense, done je suis is not a syllogism with a suppressed premiss, I infer, then, that he thought it not impossible that an imaginary being should think (i.e. be conscious) albeit he had no real existence. Of course there would be a fallacy here, but not one that Descartes might not easily fall into. In the same fallacious manner, I suppose he said, It would be quite possible antecdent by that I had never existed. But when he tried to suppose, not of a being in general, who might be imaginary, but of himself, that he was conscious without existing he found that quite impossible; while yet he had no reason or principle that could serve as major premise in the argument. This confused inability to suppose his being false, as long as he thought, was not in my terminology, Reasoning, because Reasoning 
PAP 10 renders the truth of its conclusion plain and comprehensible, and does not, like the ||||plagiaristic|||| formula of Descartes, stumble in the dark against an invisible wall of inability to conceive something. In order to expound fully my proposition that all necessary reasoning is diagrammatic, I ought to explain exactly what I mean by a Diagram. But at present it would be extremely difficult to do quite that. At a later place in this paper I will endeavour to do so; but just now, I think it will better meet the readers need to give an exposition that shall cover the main points and  to leave the others, whose needfulness is only perceived after deep study, to follow when the need of them comes out. To begin with, then, a Diagram is an Icon of a set of rationally 
PAP 11 related objects. By rationally related, I mean that these is between them, not merely one of those relation which we know by experience, but know not how to comprehend, but one of those relations which anybody who reasons at all must have an inward acquaintance with. This is not a sufficient definition, but just now I will go no further except that I will say that the Diagram not only represents the related correlates, but also, and much more definitely represents the relations between them, as so many objects of the Feon. Now necessary reasoning makes its conclusion evident. What is this "Evidence"! It consists in the fact that the truth of the conclusion a perceived, in all its generality, and in the generality how and why of the Truth is perceived. What sort of a Sign can communicate this Evidence ? 
PAP 12 No Index, surely, can it be; since it is by brute force that the Index thrusts its Object into the field of Interpretation, the consciousness, as if disdaining gentle "evidence". No Symbol can do more than apply a "rule of thumb" resting as it does entirely on Habit (including under this term natural disposition); and a Habit is no evidence. I suppose it would be the general opinion of logicians as it certainly was long mine, that the Syllogism is a Symbol, because of its Generality. But there is an inaccurate analysis and confusion of thought at the bottom of that view, for so understood it would fail to furnish evidence. It is true that ordinary Icons, - the only class of Signs that remains for necessary inference, - merely suggest the possibility of that which they represent, being percepts minus the insistency and percussivity of percepts. In themselves they are 
PAP 13 mere semes, predicating of nothing, not even so much as interrogatively. It is, therefore, a very extraordinary feature of Diagrams that they show, as literally show as a Percept shows the Perceptual Judgment to be true, - that a consequence does follow, and more marvellous yet, that it would follow under all varieties of circumstances accompanying the premisses. It is not, however, the statical Diagram-icon that directly shows this; but the Diagram-icon having been constructed with an Intention, involving a Symbol of which it is the Interpretant (as Euclid, for example, first enounces in general terms the proposition, he intends to prove, and then proceeds to draw a diagram, usually a figure, to exhibit the antecedent condition thereof) which Intention, like every other, is General as its Object in the light of this Intention 
PAP 14 determines an Initial Symbolic Interpretant, Meantime, the Diagram remains in the field of perception or imagination; and so the Iconic Diagram and its symbolic Interpretant taken together constitute what we shall not too much wrench Kant's term of in calling a Schema, which is on the one side an object capable of being observed, which on the other side it is General. [Of course, always use 'general' in the usual sense of general as to its object. If I wish to say that a sign is general as to its matter, I call it a type, or Typical.] Now let us see how the Diagram entrains its consequence. The Diagram sufficiently partakes of the percussivity of a Percept to determine, as its Dynamic or Middle Interpretant, a state activity in the Interpreter, mingled with curiosity. As usual this mixture leads to Experimentation. It is the 
PAP 15 normal Logical effect; that is to say, it not only happens in the corter of the human brain, but must plainly happen in every Quasi-mind in which Signs of all kinds have a vitality of their own. Now, sometimes in one way, sometimes in another, we need not pause to enumerate the ways, certain modes of transformation of Diagrams of the system of diagrammatization used have become recognized as permissible. Very likely the recognition descends from some former Induction, remarkably strong owing to the cheapness of mere mental experimentation. Some circumstance connected with the purpose which first prompted the construction of the diagram contributes to the determination of the permissible transformation that actually gets performed. The Schema sees, as we may say, that the 
PAP 16 transformate Diagram is substantially contained in the transformed and in the vey signiticant ||||fallures|||| of it, regardless of the accidents, Diagram, and in the significant features of it, regardless of the accidents, as for example, the Exstential Graph that remains after a deletion from the Pheme Sheet is contained in the Graph originally there, and would do so whatever colored into were employed. The transformate Diagram is the Eventual, or Rational, Interpretant of the transformand Diagram white, at the same time being a new Diagram of which the Initial Interpretant, or signification, is the Symbolic statement or statement in general terms, of the Conclusion. By this labyrinthine path, and by no other, is it possible to attain to Evidence; and Evidence belongs to every Necessary Conclusion. There are at last two other entirely different lines of argumentation each very nearly, and perhaps quite, as 
PAP 17 conclusive as the above, though less instructive, to prove that all necessary reasoning is by diagrams. One of these shows that every step of such an argumentation can be represented, but usually much more analytically, by Existential Graphs. Now to say that the graphical proceedure is more analytical than another is to say that it demonstrates what the other virtually assumes without proof. Hence, the Graphical method, which is diagremmatic is the ||||?|||| form of the same argumentation. The other proof consists in taking up, one by one, each form of necessary reasoning, and showing that the diagrammatic exhibition of it does it perfect justice. Let us now consider non necessary reasoning. This 
PAP 18 divides itself, according to the different ways in which it may be valid, into three classes, probable deduction; experimental reasoning which I now call Induction; and processes of thought, capable of producing no conclusion more definite than a conjecture, which I now call Abduction. I examined this subject in an essay in the volume of Studies in Logic by Members of the Johns Hopkins University, published in 1883; and have since made three independent and laborious investigation of the question of validity, and others connected with it. As my latest work has been written out for the press and may some time be printed, I will limit what I say here as much as possible. The general principle of the validity, of Induction is correctly stated in the 
PAP 19 Johns Hepkins Essay, but is too narrowly defined. All the forms of reasoning there principally considered come under the class of Inductions, as I now define it. Much could now be added to the Essay. The validity of Induction consists in the fact that it proceeds according to a method which though it may give previsional results that are incorrect will yet is steadily ||||?||||, eventually correct any such error. The two propositions that Induction possesses this kind of validity, and that no Induction posesses an other kind that is more than a further determination of this kind, are both susceptible of demonstration by necessary reasoning. The demonstrations are given in one Johns Hopkins paper, and although the description of the mode of validity, there 
PAP 20 is too narrow, yet it covers the strongest inductions and most of the reasoning generally recognize as inductions. It is characterestic of the present state of logic that no attempt has been made to refute the demonstrations, but the old talk conclusively refuted by me, goes on just the same. To say that the validity of Induction rests on Necessary Reasoning is as much as to say that Induction separated from the decuction of its validity does not make it evident that its conclusion has the kind of justification to which it lays claim. This being the case, it is not surprising that Induction separated from the deduction of its validity, makes no essential use of diagrams. But instead of experimenting on Diagrams it experiments upon 
PAP 21 the very Objects concerning which it reasons. That is to say, it does so in an easily extended sense of the term "experiment"; the sense in which I commonly employ the word in the critical part of logic. The third mode of non necessary reasoning, if we are ||||Devant|||| the deduction of probabilities as a class, ||||?|||| it ought not to be reckoned such is Abduction. Abduction is no more nor less than guessing, a ||||?|||| attributed to Yankees,* Foot note * In point of fact, the three most remarkable, because most apparently unfounded, guesses I know of were made by English men. They were Bacon's guess that heat was a mode of motion. Daltons of chemical atoms, and Young's (||||?|||| it Wallaston's) that violet, green (and not yellow, as the painters said) and red were the fundamental colors. 
PAP 22 Such validity as this has consists in the generalization that no new truth is ever otherwise reached while some new truths are thus reached. This is a result of Induction; and therefore in a remote way Abduction rests upon diagrammatic reasoning. The System of Existential Graphs the development of which has only been begun by a solitary student, furnishes already the best diagram of the contents of the logical Quasi-mind that has ever yet been found and premises much future perfectionment. Let us call the collective whole of all that could ever be present to the mind in anyway or in any sense, the Phaneron. Then the substance of every thought (and of much beside thought proper) will be a Constituent of the 
PAP 23 Phaneron. The Phaneron being itself far too elusive for direct observation, there can be no better method of studying it than through the Diagram of it which the System of Existential Graphs puts at our disposition. We have already tasted the first-fruits of this method, one shall soon gather more, and I, for my part, am in confident hope that by-and-by (not in my brief time,) a rich harvest may be ||||garnered|||| by this means. What, in a general way, does the Diagram of Existential Graphs represent the mode of structure of the Phaneron to be like? The question calls for a comparison, and in answering it, a little flight of fancy will be in order to represents the structure of the Phaneron to be quite like that of a chemical compound. In the imagined representation of the Phaneron, (for we shall not, as yet, undertake actually to construct 
PAP 24 such a Graph) in place of the ordinary spots, which are Graphs not represented is compound, we shall have Instances of the absolutely Indecomposable Elements of the Phaneron, (supposing it has any ultimate constituents, which of course, remains to be seen, until we come to the question of their Matter, and as long as one are, as at present, discoursing only of their possible forms, their being may be presumed,) which close enough analogies of the Atoms in the Chemical Gragh or "Rational Formula". Each Elementary Graph like each chemical elements, has its definite Valency. The number of Pegs on the periphery of its Instance, - and the Lines of Identity (which never branch) will be quite analogous to the chemical bonds. This is resemblance enough. It is true that in Existential Graphs we have the ||||?||||, to which nothing in the 
PAP 25 chemical Graph corresponds. Not yet, at any rate. We are now just beginning to ||||rend|||| away the veil that has ||||?|||| to enshrouded the constitution of the proteid bodies; but whatever I may conjecture as to those vast super-molecules, some containing fifteen thousand molecules, whether it seems probable on chemical grounds, or not, that they contain groups of opposite polarity from the residues outside those groups, and whether or not similar polar submolecules appear within the complex inorganic acids, it is certainly too early to take these into account in helping the exposition of the constitution of the Phaneron. Were such ideas as solid as they are in fact vaporous, they ought to be laid aside until we have first thoroughly learned all the lessons of that analogy between the constitution of the Phaneron and that alchemical bodies 
PAP 26 which consists in both the one and the other being compared of elements of definite valency. In all natural classification, without exception, distinctions of form, once recognized, take precedence over differences of matter. Who would now throw Iron, with its valency, perhaps of eight, as used to be done, into the same class with Manganese, of vallency seven, Chromium, with its valency of six (though these three all belong to the even forth series) and Aluminium, with valency three and in the odd series three rather than with Nickel and Cobalt and even along with Rutherrium, Rhodium, and Palladium of the sixth series, and with the tenth-series Osmium, Iridium, and Platinum? Or who would for one instant taken ordinary alcohol to methyl ether (which has the same Material composition) instead of with the 
PAP 27 alcholates? The same precedence of Form over Matter is seen in the classification of psychical products. Some of Rafael's greatest pictures, the Christ bearing the cross, for example, are ||||suppresed|||| with a Griek red tinge intended, I doubt not, to correct for the violet blueness of the deep shade of the chappels in which they were meant to be hung. But who would classify Rafael's paintings according to their predominant tinges instead of according to the nature of the composition, or the stages of Raferel's development ? There is no need of insisting upon a matter so obvious. Besides there is a rational explanation of the precedence of Form over Matter in natural classifications. For such classification time are intended tender the composition of the entries, classified collection ratioinally intelligible,  on matter what else they may be intended to show; and form is something that the mind can take in, assimilate, and comprehend, 
PAP 28 while Matter is always foreign to it, and though recognizable, is incomprehensible. The reason of this, again, is plain enough: Matter is that by virtue of which an object gains existence, a fact known only by an Index, which is connected with the object only by brute force; while Form, being that be which the object is such as it is, is comprehensible. It follows that, assuming that there are any indecomposable constituents of the Paneron, since each of these has a definite Valency, or number of Pegs to its Graph Instance, this as the only Form, of ||||?|||| the only intelligible Form, the Element of the Phaneron can have, the Classification of Elements of the Phaneron must in the first place, be classified according to their Valency, just as are the chemical elements. We call a spot a Medad, Monad, Dyad, Triad, Tetrad, or by some other 
PAP 29 such name, according as its Valency, or the number of its Pegs, is 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. It is to be remarked that a Graph not only has attachments to other Graphs through its Pegs and through lines of Identity, but is also attached to the Area on which it is scribed, this Area being a Sign of a logical Universe. But it is not the same kind of attachment, since the Entire Graph of the Area is after a fashion predicated of that Universe, while the Lines of Identity represent Individual Subjects of which the two connected Spots are predicated either being regarded as determining the other. There would therefore be a confusion of thought in adding one to the number of Pegs and calling the sum the Valency. It would rather be the sum of two different categories of Valency. But in the case of the Medad, where there is no Peg, the possibility of scribing 
PAP 30 the Graph upon an Area is the only Valency the Spot has, the only circumstance that brings it and other thoughts together. For this reason, we can, without other than a Verbal incosistency, dus to the in completeness of our terminolbgy, speak of a Medad as a Monad. For some purposes, it is indispensible so to regard it. I am now going to make a few notes which may be useful to a person in reflecting upon this subject, even if I am not led to make here any further remarks upon them. It is likely to prove convenient to have at one's disposition a certain formula which follows as a Corollary from Listing's Census-Theorem. The formula is, 2(K+S-X) = V-T; or; in words, for any Graph which is separated from others, twice the sum of the Cyclosis, K, added to the 
PAP 31 excess of the number of spots, S, over the chorisis, X, is equal to the excess of the sum of the Valencies of all the Spots in the Graph, V, over the number of Loose Ends, 1. The Chorisis, X, is the number of separate pieces which gold make up the Graph. The Cyclosis, K, is the number of Lines of tity in the Graph which might be severed without increasing the Choris is. A Loose End is an extremity of a Line of Identity not abutting upon any Spot. Such is the end of a Line of Identity on the Area of a but which abuts upon the Cut, itself. Since the Reader may not be familiar with the Census theorem, I will give an immediate demonstration of the truth of the formula. Taking any Graph whatever, let the Capital letter, K, S, X, V, I, denote respectively its Cyclesis, number of spots, Chorisis, Total Valency of its Spots, and number of Loose Ends. Sever every Line of Identity in the Graph at one point, 
PAP 32 [But it will not be necessary to cut any that has a loose end. Observe, however, that we assume without proof that the number if Lines of Identity is Finite. Observe, too, that a point of Teirdentity must be regarded as a spot.] Let the little letters k, s, x, v, l, refer to the Granh resulting from this operation, each letter having the same predicative signification as the corresponding capital. There will now be no Cyclosis: k = O. The spots will be the same as before: s = S. The Chorisis will be the same as the number of Spots: x = S. The total Valency will not have been altered: v = V. There will be a Loose End for every Peg: l = V. Thus, both members of the proposed formula will vanish; namely both 2(k+s-x) = 2(0+S-S) and v-l = V-V; and thus the formula verifies itself for this state of extreme dissection. Now restore the original Graph by bringing together the two loose ends that have resulted from severing each Line of Identity. Mend the lines one by one in any order of succession you like. Each such act of mending 
PAP 33 will leave the Total Valency unaltered, but will diminish the number of Loose Ends by 2; thus increasing the value of the second member of the formula by 2. If the two loose ends brought together belong, at the time when they are brought together, to separate pieces of the Graph, the mending cannot affect the Cyclosis, nor the number of Spots, but will diminish the Chorisis by 1, thus increasing the first member of the equation, 2(K+S-X), by 2. However the loose ends brought together do not belong to separate pieces, at the time they are brought together, they belong to the same piece; and the mending will increase the Cyclosis by 1, while leaving the number of Spots and the Chorisis unchanged; thus, again, increasing the first member of the equation by 2. Thus, both members of the equation are increased by the same amount at each step of the operation, and the equation remains 
PAP 34 remains as true after the step as before. Hence, it remains as true after all the mendings as it was in its extreme dissection. But it was then true; and is therefore true at the end. At the end it is the original Graph again; which was any Graph we pleased. Hence, the formula is true of any Graph we please, so long as the Lines of Identity are finite in number. The formula des not teach one much; but perhaps it will help to keep one in mind of what sort of work a really scientific research into the Phanenron must be. It must be a work of diagrammatic thinking, to first and last. Logic require great subtilty of thought, throughout; and especially in distinguishing those characters which belong to the diagram with which one works, but which are not significant features 
PAP 35 of it considered as the Diagram it is taken for, from those that testify as to the Form represented. For not only mega Diagram have features that are not significant at all, such as its being drawn upon "laid" or upon "wove" paper; not only may it have features that are significant but are not diagrammatically so; but one and the same construction may be, when regarded in two different ways, two altogether different diagrams; and that to which it testifies in the one capacity, it must not be considered as testifying to in the other capacity. For example, the Entire Existential Graph of a Phemio Sheet in any state of it, is a Diagram of the logical Universe, as it is also a Diagram of a Quasi-mind; but it must not, on that account, be considered as testifying to the identity of those to. This like a telescope eye piece which at one forces exhibits a star at which the 
PAP 36 instrument is pointed, and at another exhibits all the faults of the objective lens. Among Existential Graphs there are two that are remarkable for being truly continuous both in their Matter and in their corresponding Signification. There would be nothing remarkable in their being continuous in either, or in both respects; but that the continuity of the Matter should correspend to that of the Signification is sufficiently remarkable to limit these Gaphs to two; the Graph of Identity represented by the Line of Identity, and the Graph of coexistence, represented by the Blunk. Here, Reader I overhear you asking what I mean by True Continuity. Of I miss-hear, it is because I am expecting you to ask the logical question, - for questions may logically follow, as well as Assertions. Well, Reader, I reply, in asking me that question, "What do I mean by 
PAP 37 True Continuity?" you are asking one of the most difficult questions of logic. We know very well that the continuity of the Theory of Functions, which I call Pseudo-Continuity, is a certain order among the individual members of a Collection whose multitude is the same as that of the Collection of all possible collections of integer numbers. But between any two points of what I call a Truly Continuous Line there is room for any multitude of points whatsoever, and therefore of an endless series of multitude all infinitely greater than the total multitude of points of which the linear Pseudo-continuum consists. Now logicians have always rightly said that no collection of individuals whatever is adequate to presenting all the possible variations of a general term; and consequently the points of a true Linear Continuum cannot be actual constituent parts of it. Its only parts, as Kant says, are homogeneous [in respect to these qualities which belong to all tho party] with the whole, 
PAP 38 and those homogeneous parts are indeterminate, in that each may end and the next begin where you will. This is why every continuum may be regarded as the actualization of a generalized relation having the form of the relation of three (or four?) points upon a line. But it is quite evident that Kant is right (though his nominalism made the truth appear to him more psychological than logical, as it truly is) in making the primitive relation to be of the form that of two instants of time, or what is the same thing as the relation between a logical antecedent and consequent. The reason that in order to define the relation of a point upon a line to another point it is necessary to speak of a third, if not also of a fourth, point is that on the line one does not distinguish, as in the sequence of time and in that of logic, one direction from the other. But here one come upon a disputed 
PAP 39 question among exact logicians; namely, which is the more primitive (or fundametal, or simple) form of relation, that of an Equiparance (ie. a reciprocal relation,) or that of a Disquiparance? I say that it is the Disquiparance, or rather, it is the Opponency, or relation of which a specialization may be a Disquiparance. All the arguments in favor of the primitivity of the Equipance will be found upon analysis to amount substantially and in principle to this: though " is a cousin of" and "is a companion of" are both equiparances, yet "is a cousin of a companion of "i a disquiparance; and thus a disquiparance is a compound of two equiparances. Mr. Kempe in his great memoir published in the Philosophical Transactions for 1886 has a System of Graphs in which the spots have no definite Valency, and there is usually but one kind of line, which signifies 
PAP 40 whatever Equiparance may have been agreed upon. Now he places on such a line two spots of different colors, as shown in Fig 1 ///figure/// Fig. 1 and remarking that this compounded line signifies a Disquiparance (as it manifested by usually will,) he regards that as proof that an undirected line is simpler than a directed line. But I propose to show that if this has any semblance of a sound argument, it must be so understood as to be a mere variant of the argument about the cousin of a companion. For representing Fig. 1 in an Existential Graph, and putting, b, for the eqniparant relation 
PAP 41 signified by Kempe's plain line, g for the gules spot, and z for the agure spot, the Graph represented must be one or other of the three of Fig. 2, or else some other to which the same remarks ///figure/// ///figure/// ///figure/// Fig. 2 will apply. The first and third of these Graph-instances can be seven as in the middle so as to separate each into two equiparant similar to "is cousin of" and "is companion of". But the second cannot be separated into two equiparants and therefore offend one semblance of an argument; and the same is true of the third, if it be 
PAP 42 cut elsewhere than in the middle. For an Eqniparent is a general description of relation which, if it describes the relation of any individual object, A, to another, B, in every case also describes the relation of B to A. Let l be such a relation then the effect of joining z to it in the manner shown in the third graph is to make the relation in applicable to the relation of A to B unless B happens to be described by z, which of course cannot always be the case, if z has any definite segnification. If this, be use the description applicable to the relation of B to A yet inapplicable to that of A to B. In short this fragment of the Graph will (or may) signify a disquiparant relation; and there will be no semblance of argument. I will now refute the argument from the cousin of a companion in two distinct ways. In 
PAP 43 the first place, when a relation forms the predicate of a proposition, it is, in a certain sense, specialized. That is to say it is only a special case of the relation that has any relevancy to the two Subjects of the proposition; and the relation as it is in the proposition only has that limited extension. An Equiparance, however, is such only in its full generality, and usually ceases to be equiparant when limited to a special eclate and correlate. That obviously is the reason why (to make use for a moment, of the General Algebra of Logic) the relative product of two equiparants such as A:B + B:A and A:C  + C:A, gives in one order B:C and in the other order C:B. That is, in the first order, the A:B of one and the C:A of the other are irrelevant, while in the other order, the A:C of one 
PAP 44 and the B:A of the other are irrelevant, and might as well be absent. Rectify this by making every Index of an individual that occurs in either occur also in the other, as in (A:B + B:A + C:D + D:C)(A:C + C:A + B:D + D:B) and the product will be equiparant: A:D + B:C + C:D + D:A. That is one answer to the argument. In the second place, it cannot be that the fact that the relative product of two equiparants may be a disquipant - and it is not always so, nor ever so if either of the equiparants is a concurrent - cannot suffice to prove that Equiparance is more primitive, fundamental, or simple than Disguiparance, in as much as any disquiparant whatsoever relatively multipled into its own converse, which is equally disquipant, will give an equiparant product, and that without 
PAP 45 any specialization at all; so that the method of argumentation that my opponents have adopted much rather tends to prove my contention than theirs. When I speak of them as opponents, I mean they are accidentally so, as regards some particular questions. They are Exact Logicians, toiling in the honest and sincere scientific way. That and their great genius commands my respect. I think them somewhat incautious and liable to fallacious thinking; but of all of us logicians that is the peculiar danger, owing to the nature of our subject of thought. In the discussion of this particular question the method mentioned comprises their entire armory of reason. They are given to applying it in most involved forms, not: withstanding the manifest danger of fallacy's lurking complicated argumentation to prove any proposition that relates solely to extremely simple constituents of thought. That method of theirs makes 
PAP 46 decidedly in my favour. Nevertheless, I do not altogether approve of it. It seems to me to involve doubtful assumptions. I do not, to begin with, think that the distinction between Equiparance and Disquiparance has any just claim to primacy among divisions of Dyadic Relatine Terms. If I were quite sure that any formal division of them could lay such a claim, I should unhesitatingly give my vote for the distinction between Opponents and Concurrents. Opponents are terms expressing relations in which one individual object can stand to another. Concurrents are mere specializations of identity, Ordinary adjectives are concurrents. In the next place, I conceive the question of the most important division of Signs of Dyadic Relation to be subordinate to the question of the Forms of Dyadism, or Twoness, itself. Now Dyadism itself has no generality. We should come down to the most 
PAP 47 specialized possible Relatives. These are manifestly the relation of a single designate individual to another and the relation of such an individual to itself, (A:B) and (A:A). The latter form I hold to be degenerate. That is to say, it is eviscerated of the kernel of Twoness, and is a mere ||||empty|||| shell of Twoness. It is, therefore, a derived idea. But I do not see that it is, on that account, necessarily composite, in any proper and usual sense. Yet since (A:A) is the matter of Oneness masquerading under the guise of Twoness, while (A:B) is simply Twonees in its own proper guise, I conceive the latter to be more direct and in the only sense in which either is composite, to be idealy the simpler. Since Disquiparants are assimilated to (A:B), and Equiparants to (A:A), the Disquiparant appears to me to be the primitive, and the Equiparant to be the degerate, Form. I have 
PAP 48 thus given a distant hint, and no more, of the way in which, as it seems to me, this question ought to be treated. At this stage of our study of the Phaneron, I could not present the Method, as it really is. This question being settled the nature of continuity may be regarded as sufficiently understood for our purpose. Let us return there to the two continuous Graphs, which are the Blank and the Line of Identity. I will begin with the latter. The Immediate Interpretant of Identity is, I think, simple. If it were the so-called "numerical" identity only that the line signified, perhaps it might not be, since that sort of Identity implies Existence and apparently something more. But the line of Identity is not confined to metallic areas: it is also scribed on Color. 
PAP 49 Now a Possibility, not having Existence, cannot be a subject of Numerical Identity. Nor can we say that the Identity signified by the Line of Identity to the most special agreement possible, for one should not hesitate to employ the line to express that the same man who fought the battle of Leipzig fought the battle of Waterloo. Now years having elapsed, it was certainly not in entire strictness the same individual; for an individual is determinate in all respects, and therefore in date. The Eventual Interpretant of the assertion "A is identical with B" is, "A will serve all purposes instead of B" or in other words "Whatever is true of t is true of B", and the "all purposes" and "whatever is true "refer to limiter logical universes of purposes or (what is the same at bottom) of predicates. In Form, this is the statement of a Disquiparance. It 
PAP 50 is Equipurant only because the denial of an assertion is itself an assertion and fitness for one purpose is unfitness for the reverse purpose. Hereupon you will remark that if the relation to be expressed is thus Disquiparant in Form but rendered Equiparant by its Matter, then a perfect Diagram of it should have its two extremities unlike in Form, yet like in Matter, - if any meaning can be attached to that; and you will ask how I make out that to be true of the Line of Identity. I answer that I am not hired as an advocate of Existential Graphs, I suppose, like some other human inventions of which antiquaries can tell us, that it has its imperfections; and I am desirous of finding them out and exposing them to the comment of all my dear neighbours. Should you say, "If the System is as imperfect as that, its inventor who has spent so many years 
PAP 51 upon it, its inventor must be very nearly an idiot", your consequence will be very wrong, but no where in this world could you find more heartfelt assent to your consequent than in my solitary study. By no means accept anything that inventor says about Logic, unless you see for yourself that it is true. ||||?|||| let me tell you that, fool as he is, he has important truth to communicate, that is not quite smothered in blunders. A Line of Identity that abuts upon a Cut whether on its Area or on its Place may look alike at its two ends ! But an essential part of every diagram is the Conventions by which it is interpreted; and the principle that Graphs, are Endoporeutic in interpretation, as they naturally will be in the process of scribing, confers a definite sens, as the French say, a definite way of facing, a definite front and back, to the Line. If a Line of Identity does not abut upon a Cut, then that extremity of it from which 
PAP 52 the motion of the Graphist's pencil starts will be its hinder end, while the extremity at which the motion ceases will be the forward end. But since the Interpreter is at liberty to take it the other way, it would be a grave logical fault to add any barb or other mark to show which may the line faced, because it who would be introducing a rhetorical element into what is designed to be a purely logical diagram. If you ask how I make out that the line faces one way in form but the matter obliterates the distinction, I ask you to see all the definitions of Matter and Form that go back to Aristotle (though it is hard to believe they are not earlier; and the metaphysical application of ||||?|||| sounds to me like some late Ionic philosopher and not a bit like, Aristotle, whom it would also have been more like to claim it, if it were his) Form is that which makes anything such as it is, while matter makes it to be. 
PAP 53 From this pair of beautiful generalizations are born a numerous family of hanmonious and interresemblant acceptions of the two words. In speaking of Graphs we may well call the Principles of their Interpretation (such as the Endoporeutic Principle,) the Form; the way of shaping and scribing them (such as leaving the Line without Carbs,) the Matter. Nothing could be in better accord with the general definitions of Form and of Matter. I have already, in a former chapter, shown how a continuous Line of some thickness necessarily signifies Identity in the System of Existential Graph. The necessary character of this interpretation may win a pardon for any slight interpretation in the Diagrammatization of Identity by such a Line, should we detect any such imperfection of Diagrammatization in it. Kant, in one of his most characteristic chapters, beginning S.642 of 
PAP 54 the "Crititk [spell with a C.] der reinen Vernunft", and well-known "Anhang zur transcendentalen Dialektik", which treats "Von dem regulativen Gebrauch der Ideen der reinen Vernunft", sets up a sharp distinction between the constitutive and the regulative application of concepts, and lays down, as regulative principle, three laws, of which one, the Gesetz der Affinitat, becomes highly pertinent to our present question, provided, in the first place, we understand his "continuirliche Ubergang" from one concept to another in the sense of True Continuity, as we should, and, in the second place, if we recognize, as we must, that Kant's distinction is not absolute, in as much as all the so-called "constitutive" applications of principles are, at bottom, regulative. The reader means, I hope, to admit the latter condition problematically. He cannot yet to grant its trust in as much as is almost an exact definition of Pragmaticism; but in that sense of a hypothesis, as 
PAP 55 proposition that may possibly be true it seems to me he virtually has granted in consenting to read a defense of pragmatism In order to illustrate what it would mean to say that Identity is a Continuous Relation, - that is, continuous in meaning. - we may compare it with another. To say that he who commanded the French in the battle of Leipzig commanded them in the final battle of Waterloo, is not merely a statement of Identity it is a statement of Becoming. There is an existential continuity in Time between the two events. But, so understood, the statement asserts no Significative Identity, in as much as the intervening continuum is a continuum of Assertorie Truths. Now upon a continuous line there are no points, (where the line is continuous). There is only room for points, - possibilities of points. Set it is through that continuum, that line of generalization of possibilities that the actual point at one extremity necessarily leads to the actual point 
PAP 56 at the other extremity. The actualization of the two extremities consists in the two facts that at the first, without any general reason the continuum there begins awhile at the last, equally without reason, it is brutally, i.e. irrationally but forcibly cut off.